URL: https://irishskin.ie/skin-cancer/

Search
Skin Cancer
Skin cancer is the most common cancer in Ireland, with about 13,000 cases diagnosed each year.
What is skin cancer?
Skin cancer is the abnormal, uncontrolled growth of skin cells. It develops when the genetic material (DNA) inside skin cells is damaged, triggering changes that lead these cells to multiply rapidly and become cancerous.
Skin cancer is the most common cancer in Ireland. Yet in most cases, it is preventable and early detection leads to better outcomes. The vast majority of these cancers are caused by overexposure to ultraviolet radiation (UV), mainly from sunlight, although UV from artificial sources (e.g. sunbeds) can also cause skin cancer.
There are two main categories: non-melanoma skin cancer (comprising of basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma) and malignant melanoma. Of the different types of skin cancer, melanoma is not the most common but raises the greatest concern as it can spread to other parts of the body, where it becomes difficult to treat and can be fatal.
A majority of people in Ireland have fair skin which burns easily and tans poorly, so are particularly vulnerable to sun damage and skin cancer.
The most obvious warning sign of skin cancer is a change in the appearance of the skin, such as a new growth, a sore that will not heal, a new and changing mole, or the change in appearance of an existing mole.
We want everyone in Ireland to learn to Protect & Inspect their skin! Download our melanoma skin cancer leaflet below.
Our Melanoma Skin Cancer leaflet has been prepared with hospital-based dermatologists to help you understand what melanoma is, the warning signs to look out for, and how to protect and inspect your skin.
Download Booklet
Melanoma skin cancer
Melanoma: the facts
Melanoma is a potentially serious type of skin cancer. It occurs when the pigment-producing cells (melanocytes) in the skin grow unchecked. Non-cancerous growths of melanocytes are known as moles or freckles.
Unlike many other types of cancer, melanoma often occurs in young and middle aged adults. It is the fourth most common cancer in Ireland. The number of cases of melanoma and the number of deaths from melanoma have been increasing in Ireland over the last 20 years.
Fortunately, melanoma can be completely cured if it is identified and removed early. You can reduce your risk of melanoma by seeing your doctor if you find a suspicious growth on your skin, and by avoiding excessive UV exposure and sunburns.
What does a melanoma look like?
Most melanomas appear on apparently normal looking skin. Others arise from a pre-existing mole or freckle which grows or changes in appearance. Some melanomas are itchy, painful or may bleed.
Melanomas can occur anywhere on the body, including areas that are protected from the sun. The commonest site for melanoma in women is the lower leg. For men, the commonest site is the back.
What warning signs should you look out for?
Anything
new
,
different
and
changing
.
Be alert for a new and changing mole, or the change in appearance of an existing mole.
Things to watch out for include: changes in shape, colour, size or if you notice bleeding, itch, pain or ulceration. The
ABCDE
method indicates some changes to look out for, to help detect a melanoma. Melanomas tend to:
be
A
symmetrical
have an irregular
B
order
have multiple
C
olours
have a
D
iameter greater than 6mm
E
volve, enlarge or change
However, not all melanomas follow the clues of ABCDE. You should check any skin growth that is changing.
If you are concerned about a skin growth, you should always see your GP or Dermatologist.
The ‘Ugly Duckling’ method
A person’s ‘normal’ moles tend to look alike, resembling each other in shape, colour and size. Check any mole that is different form the others, the so called ‘ugly duckling’.
Risk factors for melanoma
While anyone can develop a melanoma, several factors can increase the risk.
Occasional, intense sun exposure
Sunburn, particularly during childhood
Sunbed use
A previous melanoma or other non-melanoma skin cancer
Multiple large or unusual moles
Immunosuppression
Many moles (of different sizes, shapes and colours)
A fair complexion: pale skin, blue eyes, red/blonde hair, freckles
A family history of melanoma
Preventing melanoma
The best way to prevent melanoma is to protect yourself from overexposure to UV in sunlight and avoid sunbeds/tanning booths. It is particularly important to avoid intense sun exposure and sunburns, especially when the
UV index is 3 or above
,
whether in Ireland or on sunny holidays abroad.
You can also protect yourself by regularly checking your own skin (ask a family member or friend to help you check your back) and by seeking early medical attention if you notice any suspicious growth.
Treatment and prognosis
If your doctor is concerned about a particular growth, you may be referred to a consultant dermatologist or plastic surgeon for diagnosis. If a melanoma is diagnosed early enough, it can be completely cured with simple surgery alone.
If a melanoma has spread to other parts of the body, the prognosis is less favourable. It is therefore important that melanoma is treated promptly, before it spreads.
Anyone diagnosed with melanoma will need follow up because there is a risk of the melanoma recurring, as well as an increased likelihood of developing another melanoma.
Things to remember about melanoma
Melanoma is a potentially serious type of skin cancer
Melanoma often looks like an unusual freckle or mole that is changing or growing
Early detection and treatment is key to a positive outcome
You can reduce your risk of melanoma by avoiding sunburns and checking your skin
If you are concerned about a growth on your skin, you should see your GP or Dermatologist
Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC)
Non-melanoma skin cancer: the facts
NMSC is a common problem in Ireland, affecting 1 in 6 men and 1 in 9 women over their lifetime. The incidence of NMSC in Ireland has been increasing during the last two decades. There are many types of NMSC, the commonest being basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
Skin cancer occurs when cells in the skin become damaged over many years, usually from UV in sunlight. The damaged cells grow unchecked, leading to the development of a tumour, or lump in the skin. If left untreated, some types of NMSC can spread to other parts of the body.
Thankfully, NMSC can almost always be completely cured if identified and treated early.
Risk factors for non-melanoma skin cancer
The most important risk factor for skin cancer is exposure to UV, usually from the sun. Frequent sunburns, sunburns in childhood, chronic sun exposure over many years (in work or recreational activities) and tanning salon use all increase the risk of NMSC.
People with fair skin, freckles or red hair are particularly at risk, as are people with an impaired immune system (for example those taking certain medications or organ transplant recipients). Smoking has been associated with the development of SCC.
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC)
BCC is the commonest type of NMSC. There are three main types BCC, each of which has a different appearance:
Nodular: Often appear on the face as a shiny, skin coloured lump. May ulcerate or bleed.
Superficial: Tend to occur on the chest, back and limbs. Usually appear as a red, scaly patch.
Morphoeic: Usually scar-like, hard lumps in the skin. Tend to be more aggressive.
BCCs are usually painless and grow slowly over months to years. While they almost never spread to other parts of the body, if untreated they can cause damage to the skin and surrounding structures, such as the eyes, nose or ears.
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
SCC tends to arise in areas of skin exposed to the sun, namely the face, backs of the hands, forearms, shins and the balding scalp. They usually appear as red, scaly lumps that may be painful. In contrast to BCCs, they can arise quickly, over a period of weeks to months. If untreated, they may spread to other areas of the body, particularly if they arise on the ear or lips.
Treatment and prevention
NMSC is usually treated with surgical removal. Some BCCs and SCCs can be treated with other techniques such as specialised creams, liquid nitrogen therapy, curettage (scraping of the skin) or radiotherapy. In general, the earlier the skin cancer is diagnosed, the less invasive the treatment options.
NMSC can be prevented by UV protection, which includes avoiding the sun, using protective clothing and applying sunscreen regularly. This is particularly important in Ireland between April and September, and also during sunny holidays abroad. Those who have had an NMSC before should take extra care, as they are at higher risk of developing another NMSC.
Things to remember about non-melanoma skin cancer
It is common in Ireland, occurring in 1 in 6 men and 1 in 9 women over a lifetime
It can appear as a smooth or scaly lump, patch or scar-like area
The strongest risk factor is exposure to UV rays, from the sun and sunbeds/tanning booths
If diagnosed early, it is almost always completely curable
If you are concerned you may have a non-melanoma skin cancer, please see your doctor.
About moles
Moles are normal non-cancerous clusters of melanocytes (pigment-producing cells in the skin). Moles are normal and having 20-40 moles is not unusual.
A mole is more correctly referred to as a ‘melanocytic naevus’ (spelled ‘nevus’ in the USA and ‘nevi’ to indicate more than one mole). You may hear your doctor use some or all of these terms or encounter them online yourself.
The vast majority of moles are not dangerous. Be alert for a new and changing mole, or the change in appearance of an existing mole.
Risks: know your skin type
Most people living in Ireland have fair skin which burns easily and tans poorly, so are particularly vulnerable to sun damage and skin cancer.
You are more likely to develop skin cancer if you have fair complexion (pale skin, blue or green eyes, red or blond hair); spent a lot of time in the sun whether for work or recreation; those who have experienced intermittent, short bursts of intense sunlight (on holiday for instance); have a history of sunburns particularly during childhood; or use sunbeds/tanning devices.
Know your skin type
A person’s natural skin colour influences their risk of skin cancer, but many of us tend to think we are darker than we actually are. This is why it is so important to
know your ‘skin type’
to get a better sense of the care you need to take in the sun.
The
Fitzpatrick Skin Classification Scale
is a scale that ranges from 1 (high risk) to 6 (low risk), and considers skin colour (pale white to black), and how the skin reacts to sunlight (whether it burns easily or tans).
Protect & Inspect ™
Think the five ‘Ss’ of sun safety —
Slip
,
Slop,
Slap
,
Seek,
Slide
:
Slip
on clothing: Cover skin as much as possible e.g. wear long sleeves, collared t-shirts, clothes made from close-woven material that does not allow sunlight through.
Slop
on broad-spectrum (UVA/UVB) sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 30+ for adults and 50+ for children, with high UVA protection, and water resistant. Reapply regularly.
Slap
on a hat with a wide brim: Protect your face, ears and neck.
Seek
shade: Sit in cover of trees to avoid direct sunlight and use a sunshade on your buggy or pram. Keep babies and children out of direct sunlight.
Slide
on sunglasses with UV protection: Guard your eyes from harm.
Protect your family:
Babies and young children are particularly vulnerable to sun exposure.
Remember:
Do not deliberately try to tan. No sunbathing, no sunburning and never ever use a sunbed.
Regular self-examination of skin, looking out for the appearance of a new mole or a change in an existing mole, can also help with melanoma detection.
Your skin and the sun video
Watch Dr. Patrick Ormond, Consultant Dermatological and MOHS Micrographic Surgeon at St James’s Hospital, and learn more about
“
Your skin and the sun
“
.
Mohs surgery
Mohs surgery is a precise technique considered to be the gold standard for treating many skin cancers. During Mohs surgery, thin layers of cancer-containing skin are progressively removed and examined until only cancer-free tissue remains.
The goal of Mohs surgery is to remove as much of the skin cancer as possible, while doing minimal damage to surrounding healthy tissue. Mohs surgery is usually done on an outpatient basis using a local anaesthetic.
Mohs surgery is an improvement to standard surgery (local excision), which involves removing the visible cancer and a small margin of surrounding healthy tissue all at once. Mohs surgery allows surgeons to verify that all cancer cells have been removed at the time of surgery. This increases the chance of a cure and reduces the need for additional treatments or additional surgery.
Skin cancer prevention video
Skin cancer prevention presented by Dr Rupert Barry, Consultant Dermatologist, St James’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
Instagram
Facebook
Twitter X
Youtube
Terms of Use
Cookies policy
Privacy Statement
About our Helpline
Irish Skin Foundation, Charles Institute of Dermatology, University College Dublin, Dublin D04 V1W8, Ireland.
tel: (01) 486 6280 | e-mail:
info@irishskin.ie
|
www.irishskin.ie
Registered Charity Number: 20078706
Manage Cookie Consent
We use cookies to optimise our website and our service.
Functional
Functional
Always active
The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network.
Preferences
Preferences
The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user.
Statistics
Statistics
The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes.
The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you.
Marketing
Marketing
The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes.
Manage options
Manage services
Manage {vendor_count} vendors
Read more about these purposes
Accept
Deny
Preferences
Save preferences
Preferences
{title}
{title}
{title}
Settings