URL: https://news.ecu.edu/2021/07/19/biotechnology-center-grant-funds-cancer-compound-research/

Biotechnology center grant funds cancer compound research
Published Jul 19, 2021 by
Matt Smith
Filed under:
ECU Now Blog
Faculty/Staff
Health Sciences
Medical
Research
A compound
developed
by an
associate
professor at East Carolina University could lead to more effective skin cancer treatments.
Dr.
Rukiyah Van Dross-Anderson
, a faculty member in the
Brody School of Medicine’s
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology
, was awarded a
North Carolina Biotechnology Center
(NCBC)
Translational Research Grant for
the development and commercialization of
15-deoxy, Δ12,14-prostaglandin J2-ethanolamide
—
also known as
15dPMJ2.
The compound
is designed
to
treat
melanoma patients.
More than 100,000 new cases of melanoma were diagnosed in 2020, leading to 7,000 deaths, with five-year survival rates for
stage
4 melanoma
patients as low as 22.5%, according to Van Dross-Anderson.
Dr. Rukyiah Van Dross works in a lab in the Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology at the Brody School of Medicine. Van Dross-Anderson’s cancer compound is designed to treat melanoma patients by activating cells that attack cancer cells without causing damage to other cells. (Photo by Rhett Butler)
“Our lab’s compound causes cancer cells to release molecules that alert the body that a hazardous condition exists,” Van Dross-Anderson said. “This danger signal is recognized by immune cells that can activate other cells that
specialize in killing cancer cells. These cancer-killing cells also remember the cancer if it reappears. As a result, the patient may
remain cancer free
for longer periods of time.”
Van Dross-Anderson’s study will
determine
three things: finding
the
best
dose of the compound,
figuring out
whether the compound is more effective in increasing melanoma survival rates compared to current treatment standards, and
showing
whether the compound can work cooperatively with
additional
therapies.
The $110,000
NCBiotech
grant allows Van Dross-Anderson to explore the commercial feasibility of the compound. She will develop a business and commercialization case that includes a manufacturing development plan and a management strategy for the compound. Van Dross-Anderson will decide the commercial future of the product and
determine
whether to advance the technology and seek
additional
investment funding once it’s produced.
“The goal
of the grant is
to conduct studies that will allow innovative laboratory technologies to be converted into commercial products that solve important biomedical problems,” Van Dross-Anderson said. “To figure out the business side of things, we collaborated with experts in drug development, technology transfer and commercialization funding.”
Van Dross-Anderson has worked closely with ECU’s
Office of Innovation and New Ventures
during the grant proposal process.
“While the researchers on our team have extensive experience conducting biomedical studies, we have limited experience in business matters,” Van Dross-Anderson said. “The Office of Licensing and Commercialization has helped us to obtain knowledge in business and product development by making different workshops and training opportunities available to our team.
“Gaining knowledge about these topics helped us confirm whether our product
was
needed by the public and to identify the specific patient populations that will derive the greatest benefit from our technology. In addition, the
office
keeps us informed about training opportunities offered by agencies outside of ECU,
including NCBiotech,
the
Small Business Technology Development Center at ECU
and federal funding agencies.”
With her project underway,
preclinical studies will soon begin.
“We’re utilizing
the funds obtained from NCBiotech
to conduct preclinical studies that will determine the effect of our technology on melanoma survival rates,”
Van Dross-Anderson
said. “We will also work with drug development professionals to refine our roadmap to commercialization in order to make safe and effective anticancer drugs available to the public.”
Van Dross-Anderson is a 2017 National Academy of Inventors inductee. She
holds one patent for
15dPMJ2
in the
United States
and
has
patents
pending in the
U.S., Australia, New
Zealand
and Europe for the compound’s use.
ECU’s Office of Innovation and New Ventures offers entrepreneurial and commercialization-focused programs for students,
faculty
and staff, including
I-Corps@ECU
, the
Laboratory Licensing Partnership Program
and the
ECU Digital Market
.