URL: https://www.aad.org/member/clinical-quality/guidelines/melanoma

More than 1 million people are living with melanoma, and one person dies of the disease every hour. These new evidence-based guidelines address the most commonly considered and utilized approaches for the surgical and medical treatment of primary cutaneous melanoma. 

Review guideline highlights or download the full guidelines below.
Access melanoma guidelines
Access the full melanoma guidelines from JAAD
Go to the guidelines
Guideline highlights:
The guideline recommends the types of biopsies that obtain the histopathologic information necessary to optimize the diagnosis of cutaneous melanoma and guide further management.
Surgery remains the cornerstone of cutaneous melanoma treatment. Mohs micrographic surgery and other staged excision techniques can provide exhaustive peripheral margin histologic assessment for melanoma in situ, lentigo maligna type, as well as tissue sparing in anatomically constrained sites.
Nonsurgical approaches (imiquimod and traditional forms of radiation therapy) should only be considered if surgery is impractical or contraindicated, and only for melanoma in situ, lentigo maligna type, as the cure rates associated with these treatments are lower.
As options to treat metastatic disease have greatly improved, including in the adjuvant setting, accurate staging is critical and may incorporate sentinel lymph node biopsy for pathological staging of the regional lymph nodes in appropriate patients.
The frequency and intensity of cutaneous melanoma follow-up, including surveillance imaging, depends on the stage of disease, risk for recurrence, and risk of new primary melanoma.
The guideline also addresses melanoma in pregnancy, genetic testing for hereditary risk, and the management of dermatologic toxicities related to novel therapies for advanced disease.
Skin Cancer Resource Center for patients
Are you looking for information on managing and treating your skin cancer? The Academy offers a wealth of skin cancer prevention and treatment information for the public in the
Skin Cancer Resource Center
.
Additional Academy resources for physicians
Dermatology World
articles
Melanoma incidence continues to rise — but young women inspire hope
Treating metastatic melanoma: Understanding a brave new world
Should a patient's age determine whether they receive SLN biopsy?
What features are most helpful in diagnosing challenging melanoma cases?
Keeping watch: Melanoma monitoring becomes a team effort
Dermatology gets personal: Genetic testing increasingly impacts diagnosis, treatment
MIPS reporting
MIPS quality measures
Academy position statements
Indoor tanning
(PDF download)
Access to sunscreen and protective clothing
(PDF download)
Reflectance confocal microscopy
(PDF download)
Appropriate uses of paraffin sections in association with Mohs
(PDF download)
Cost-effective dermatologic care
(PDF download)
Vitamin D
(PDF download)
Electronic surface brachytherapy
(PDF download)
Patient pamphlets
Melanoma pamphlet
Skin cancer pamphlet
Simulated Patient Encounter
Breaking Bad News
View the AAD guidelines disclaimer
.