URL: https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/melanoma-skin-cancer/treating/surgery.html

Skip to main content
×
English
English
Español
Esta página
Página inicial
PDFs by language
Arabic (اللغة العربية)
Chinese (简体中文)
French (Français)
Haitian Creole (Kreyòl Ayisyen)
Hindi (जानकारी)
Korean (한국어)
Polish (język polski)
Portuguese (Português)
Russian (Русский)
Spanish (Español)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
Ukrainian (Українська)
Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt)
All Languages
Contact Us
800.227.2345
Help
Sign Up For Email
Give In Honor & Memorial
Donate
https://searchapi.cancer.org
Search
Use double-quotes ("") around a phrase for an exact result
Online Help
Our 24/7 cancer helpline provides information and answers for people dealing with cancer. We can connect you with trained cancer information specialists who will answer questions about a cancer diagnosis and provide guidance and a compassionate ear.
Start Live Chat
Live Chat available weekdays, 7:00 am - 6:30 pm CT
Call us at
1-800-227-2345
Available any time of day or night
Our highly trained specialists are available 24/7 via phone and on weekdays can assist through online chat. We connect patients, caregivers, and family members with essential services and resources at every step of their cancer journey. Ask us how you can get involved and support the fight against cancer. Some of the topics we can assist with include:
Referrals to patient-related programs or resources
Donations, website, or event-related assistance
Tobacco-related topics
Volunteer opportunities
Cancer Information
For medical questions, we encourage you to review our information with your doctor.
Melanoma Skin Cancer
About Melanoma Skin Cancer
What Is Melanoma Skin Cancer?
Key Statistics for Melanoma Skin Cancer
What’s New in Melanoma Skin Cancer Research?
Causes, Risk Factors, and Prevention
Risk Factors for Melanoma Skin Cancer
What Causes Melanoma Skin Cancer?
Can Melanoma Skin Cancer Be Prevented?
Genetic Counseling and Testing for People at High Risk of Melanoma
Early Detection, Diagnosis, and Staging
Can Melanoma Skin Cancer Be Found Early?
Signs and Symptoms of Melanoma Skin Cancer
Tests for Melanoma Skin Cancer
Questions to Ask About Melanoma Skin Cancer
Melanoma Skin Cancer Stages
Survival Rates for Melanoma Skin Cancer
Treating Melanoma Skin Cancer
Surgery for Melanoma Skin Cancer
Immunotherapy for Melanoma Skin Cancer
Targeted Therapy Drugs for Melanoma Skin Cancer
Chemotherapy for Melanoma Skin Cancer
Radiation Therapy for Melanoma Skin Cancer
Treatment of Melanoma Skin Cancer, by Stage
After Treatment
Living as a Melanoma Skin Cancer Survivor
Back
Download Section as PDF
Surgery for Melanoma Skin Cancer
Surgery is the main treatment option for most melanomas, and it usually cures early-stage melanomas.
On this page
[
show
]
[
hide
]
Wide excision
Lymph node dissection
Surgery for metastatic melanoma
More information about surgery
Wide excision
When melanoma is diagnosed by
skin biopsy
, more surgery will probably be needed to help make sure the cancer has been removed (excised) completely. This fairly minor operation will cure most thin melanomas.
Local anesthesia is injected into the area to numb it before the excision. The site of the tumor is then cut out, along with a small amount of normal skin around the edges (called the
margins
). The wound is usually stitched back together afterward. This will leave a scar.
The removed sample is then viewed with a microscope to make sure that no cancer cells were left behind at the edges of the skin that was removed.
Wide excision differs from an
excisional biopsy
. The margins are wider because the diagnosis is already known. The recommended margins vary depending on the thickness of the tumor. Thicker tumors need larger margins (both at the edges and in the depth of the excision).
The margins can also vary based on where the melanoma is on the body and other factors. For example, if the melanoma is on the face, the margins may be smaller to avoid large scars or other problems. Smaller margins might increase the risk of the cancer coming back, so be sure to discuss the options with your doctor.
Mohs surgery
Mohs surgery (also known as Mohs micrographic surgery, or MMS) might be an option for some very early-stage melanomas that are in areas where a wide excision would be hard to do (such as the face or ears). This type of surgery is used more often for some other types of skin cancer.
Mohs surgery
is done by a specially trained dermatologist or surgeon. In this procedure, the skin (including the melanoma) is removed in very thin layers. Each layer is then quickly frozen and looked at with a microscope. If cancer cells are seen, the doctor removes another layer of skin. This is repeated until a layer shows no signs of cancer. This is a slow process, often taking several hours, but it means that more normal skin near the tumor can be saved, which can help the area look better after surgery.
Amputation
In uncommon situations where the melanoma is on a finger or toe and has grown deeply, part or all of that digit might need to be amputated.
Lymph node dissection
In this operation, the surgeon removes all of the
lymph nodes
in the region near the primary melanoma tumor. For example, if the melanoma is on a leg, the surgeon would remove the nodes in the groin region on that side of the body, which is where melanoma cells would most likely travel to first.
Once the diagnosis of melanoma is made from the skin biopsy, the doctor will examine the lymph nodes near the melanoma. Depending on the thickness and location of the melanoma, this may be done by physical exam, or by
imaging tests
(such as ultrasound or CT or PET scans) to look at nodes that are not near the body surface.
If the nearby lymph nodes are abnormally hard or large, and a fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy or excisional biopsy finds melanoma in a node or nodes, a lymph node dissection is usually done.
If the lymph nodes are not enlarged, a
sentinel lymph node biopsy
may be done, particularly if the melanoma is thicker than 1 mm. (See
Tests for Melanoma Skin Cancer
for a description of this procedure.)  If the sentinel lymph node does not contain cancer, then there is no need for a lymph node dissection because it’s unlikely the melanoma has spread to the lymph nodes. If the sentinel lymph node contains cancer cells, removing the remaining lymph nodes in that area with a lymph node dissection is usually advised. This is called a
completion lymph node dissection
.
It’s not clear if a lymph node dissection can cure melanomas that have spread to the nodes. This is still being studied. Still, some doctors feel it might help a person live longer and at least avoid the pain that may be caused by cancer growing in these lymph nodes.
A full lymph node dissection can cause some long-term side effects. One of the most troublesome can be
lymphedema
. Lymph nodes in the groin or under the arm normally help drain fluid from the limbs. If they are removed, fluid may build up. This can cause limb swelling, which may or may not go away. If it’s severe enough, it can cause skin problems and an increased risk of infections in the limb. Elastic stockings or compression sleeves can help some people with this condition. For more information, see
Lymphedema
.
Lymphedema, along with the pain from the surgery itself, is a main reason why lymph node dissection is not done unless the doctor feels it is really necessary. Sentinel lymph node biopsy, however, is unlikely to have this effect. It’s important to discuss the risks of side effects with your doctor before having either of these procedures.
Surgery for metastatic melanoma
If melanoma has spread (metastasized) from the skin to other organs such as the lungs or brain, the cancer is very unlikely to be curable by surgery. Even when only 1 or 2 areas of spread are
found by imaging tests
such as CT, MRI, or PET scans, there are likely to be others that are too small to be found by these scans.
Surgery is sometimes done in these circumstances, but the goal is usually to try to control the cancer rather than to cure it. If 1 or even a few metastases are present and can be removed completely, this surgery may help some people live longer. Removing metastases in some places, such as the brain, might also help prevent or relieve symptoms and improve a person’s quality of life.
If you have metastatic melanoma and your doctor suggests surgery as a treatment option, be sure you understand what the goal of the surgery would be, as well as its possible benefits and risks.
More information about surgery
For more general information about surgery as a treatment for cancer, see
Cancer Surgery
.
To learn about some of the side effects listed here and how to manage them, see
Managing Cancer-related Side Effects
.
Written by
References
The American Cancer Society medical and editorial content team
Our team is made up of doctors and oncology certified nurses with deep knowledge of cancer care as well as editors and translators with extensive experience in medical writing.
Gershenwald JE, Keung E. Surgical management of primary cutaneous melanoma or melanoma at other unusual sites. UpToDate. 2023. Accessed at https://www.uptodate.com/contents/surgical-management-of-primary-cutaneous-melanoma-or-melanoma-at-other-unusual-sites on September 25, 2023.
Mitchell TC, Karakousis G, Schuchter L. Chapter 66: Melanoma. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Melanoma: Cutaneous. Version 2.2023. Accessed at https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/cutaneous_melanoma.pdf on September 25, 2023.
Ribas A, Read P, Slingluff CL. Chapter 92: Cutaneous Melanoma. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds.
DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019.
Swetter SM, Tsao H, Bichakjian CK, et al. Guidelines of care for the management of primary cutaneous melanoma.
J Am Acad Dermatol
. 2019;80:208-250.
Last Revised:
October 27, 2023
American Cancer Society medical information is copyrighted material. For reprint requests, please see our
Content Usage Policy
.
American Cancer Society Emails
Sign up to stay up-to-date with news, valuable information, and ways to get involved with the American Cancer Society.
Sign Up for Email
More in Melanoma Skin Cancer
About Melanoma Skin Cancer
Causes, Risk Factors, and Prevention
Early Detection, Diagnosis, and Staging
Treatment
After Treatment
Help us end cancer as we know it, for everyone.
Donate with Confidence