URL: https://www.cancer.org/cancer/types/basal-and-squamous-cell-skin-cancer/about/what-is-basal-and-squamous-cell.html

Skip to main content
×
English
English
Español
Esta página
Página inicial
PDFs by language
Arabic (اللغة العربية)
Chinese (简体中文)
French (Français)
Haitian Creole (Kreyòl Ayisyen)
Hindi (जानकारी)
Korean (한국어)
Polish (język polski)
Portuguese (Português)
Russian (Русский)
Spanish (Español)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
Ukrainian (Українська)
Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt)
All Languages
Contact Us
800.227.2345
Help
Sign Up For Email
Give In Honor & Memorial
Donate
https://searchapi.cancer.org
Search
Use double-quotes ("") around a phrase for an exact result
Online Help
Our 24/7 cancer helpline provides information and answers for people dealing with cancer. We can connect you with trained cancer information specialists who will answer questions about a cancer diagnosis and provide guidance and a compassionate ear.
Start Live Chat
Live Chat available weekdays, 7:00 am - 6:30 pm CT
Call us at
1-800-227-2345
Available any time of day or night
Our highly trained specialists are available 24/7 via phone and on weekdays can assist through online chat. We connect patients, caregivers, and family members with essential services and resources at every step of their cancer journey. Ask us how you can get involved and support the fight against cancer. Some of the topics we can assist with include:
Referrals to patient-related programs or resources
Donations, website, or event-related assistance
Tobacco-related topics
Volunteer opportunities
Cancer Information
For medical questions, we encourage you to review our information with your doctor.
Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancer
About Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancer
What Are Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers?
Key Statistics for Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers
What’s New in Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancer Research?
Causes, Risk Factors, and Prevention
Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancer Risk Factors
What Causes Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers?
Can Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers Be Prevented?
Early Detection, Diagnosis, and Staging
Can Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers Be Found Early?
Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancer Symptoms
Tests for Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers
Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancer Stages and Risk Groups
Questions to Ask About Your Basal or Squamous Cell Skin Cancer
Treating Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancer
Surgery for Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers
Non-surgical Local Treatments for Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers
Radiation Therapy for Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers
Systemic Chemotherapy for Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers
Targeted Therapy for Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers
Immunotherapy for Advanced Basal or Squamous Cell Skin Cancers
Treating Basal Cell Carcinoma
Treating Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Skin
Treating Actinic Keratosis and Bowen Disease
After Treatment
Living as a Basal or Squamous Cell Skin Cancer Survivor
Back
Download Section as PDF
What Are Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancers?
Basal and squamous cell skin cancers are the most common types of skin cancer. These cancers are often related to sun exposure.
On this page
[
show
]
[
hide
]
Where do skin cancers start?
Basal cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Other types of skin cancer
Benign skin tumors
Where do skin cancers start?
Most skin cancers start in the top layer of skin, called the
epidermis
. There are 3 main types of cells in this layer:
Squamous cells:
These are flat cells in the upper (outer) part of the epidermis, which are constantly shed as new ones form. When these cells grow out of control, they can develop into squamous cell skin cancer (also called
squamous cell carcinoma
).
Basal cells:
These cells are in the lower part of the epidermis, called the
basal cell layer.
These cells constantly divide to form new cells to replace the squamous cells that wear off the skin’s surface. As these cells move up in the epidermis, they get flatter, eventually becoming squamous cells. Skin cancers that start in the basal cell layer are called
basal cell skin cancers
or
basal cell carcinomas.
Melanocytes:
These cells make the brown pigment called
melanin,
which gives the skin its tan or brown color. Melanin acts as the body’s natural sunscreen, protecting the deeper layers of the skin from some of the harmful effects of the sun. Melanoma skin cancer starts in these cells.
The epidermis is separated from the deeper layers of skin (the dermis and the subcutis) by a thin layer of tissue known as the
basement membrane
. When a skin cancer becomes more advanced, it generally grows through this barrier and into the deeper layers.
What Is Cancer?
Cancer starts when cells in the body begin to grow out of control. Cells in nearly any part of the body can become cancer cells. Learn more here.
Anatomy Gallery: Skin
Explore our 3D interactive tour of the skin system.
Basal cell carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC, also called
basal cell skin cancer,
or just
basal cell cancer
) is most common type of skin cancer. About 8 out of 10 skin cancers are basal cell carcinomas.
These cancers start in the basal cell layer, which is the lower part of the epidermis.
BCCs usually develop on sun-exposed areas, especially the face, head, neck, and arms. They tend to grow slowly. It’s very rare for a basal cell cancer to spread to other parts of the body. But if BCC is left untreated, it can grow into nearby areas and invade the bone or other tissues beneath the skin.
If not removed completely, BCC can come back (recur) in the same place on the skin. People who have had basal cell skin cancers are also more likely to get new ones in other places.
Squamous cell carcinoma
About 2 out of 10 skin cancers are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs, also called
squamous cell skin cancers, cutaneous squamous cell cancers,
or just
squamous cell cancers
). These cancers start in the flat cells in the upper (outer) part of the epidermis.
SCCs commonly appear on sun-exposed areas of the body such as the face, ears, neck, lips, arms, and backs of the hands. They can also develop in scars or chronic skin sores elsewhere. They sometimes start in
actinic keratoses
(described below). Less often, they form in the skin of the genital area.
Squamous cell cancers can usually be removed completely (or treated in other ways), although they are much more likely than basal cell cancers to grow into deeper layers of skin and spread to other parts of the body.
Pre-cancerous and other skin conditions related to squamous cell carcinoma
Actinic keratosis (solar keratosis)
Actinic keratosis (AK), also known as
solar keratosis
, is a pre-cancerous skin condition caused by too much exposure to the sun. AKs are usually small (less than 1/4 inch across), rough or scaly spots that may be pink-red or flesh-colored. Usually they start on the face, ears, backs of the hands, and arms of middle-aged or older people with fair skin, although they can occur on other sun-exposed areas. People who have them usually develop more than one.
AKs tend to grow slowly and usually do not cause any symptoms (although some might be itchy or sore). They sometimes go away on their own, but they may come back.
A small percentage of AKs may turn into squamous cell skin cancers. Most AKs do not become cancer, but it can be hard sometimes to tell them apart from true skin cancers, so doctors often recommend
treating
them. If they are not treated, you and your doctor should check them regularly for changes that might be signs of skin cancer.
Squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen disease)
Squamous cell carcinoma in situ, also called
Bowen disease,
is the earliest form of squamous cell skin cancer. “In situ” means that the cells of these cancers are still only in the epidermis (the upper layer of the skin) and have not invaded deeper layers.
Bowen disease appears as reddish patches. Compared with AKs, Bowen disease patches tend to be larger, redder, scalier, and sometimes crusted. Like AK, Bowen disease usually doesn’t cause symptoms, although it might be itchy or sore.
Like most other skin cancers (and AKs), these patches most often appear in sun-exposed areas. Bowen disease can also occur in the skin of the anal and genital areas (where it is known as
erythroplasia of Queyrat
or
Bowenoid papulosis
). This is often related to sexually transmitted infection with human papillomaviruses (HPVs), the viruses that can also cause genital warts.
Bowen disease can sometimes progress to an invasive squamous cell skin cancer, so doctors usually recommend
treating
it. People who have these are also at higher risk for other skin cancers, so close follow-up with a doctor is important.
Keratoacanthoma
Keratoacanthomas (KAs) are dome-shaped tumors that often have a crater-like area in the middle, like a volcano. These tumors tend to start on sun-exposed skin. They may start out growing quickly, but their growth usually slows down. Many keratoacanthomas shrink or even go away on their own over time without any treatment. But some continue to grow, and a few may even spread to other parts of the body.
Many doctors view keratoacanthomas as a type of squamous cell skin cancer, although not all doctors agree. These tumors can be hard to tell apart from SCC just by looking at them, and their growth is often hard to predict, so doctors usually advise removing or destroying them (similar to how SCCs are treated).
Other types of skin cancer
Melanoma
These cancers develop from
melanocytes,
the pigment-making cells in the epidermis. Melanomas are much less common than basal and squamous cell cancers, but they are more likely to grow and spread if left untreated. Melanomas are discussed in
Melanoma Skin Cancer
.
Less common types of skin cancer
Other types of skin cancer are much less common and are treated differently. These include:
Merkel cell carcinoma
Kaposi sarcoma
Cutaneous (skin) lymphoma
Skin adnexal tumors
(tumors that start in hair follicles or skin glands)
Various types of
sarcomas
Together, these types account for less than 1% of all skin cancers.
Benign skin tumors
Most skin tumors are benign (not cancerous) and rarely if ever turn into cancers. There are many kinds of benign skin tumors, including:
Most types of
moles
(see
Melanoma Skin Cancer
for more about moles)
Seborrheic keratoses:
tan, brown, or black raised spots with a waxy texture or occasionally a slightly rough and crumbly surface when they are on the legs (also known as
stucco keratosis
)
Hemangiomas:
benign blood vessel growths, often called
strawberry spots
Lipomas:
soft tumors made up of fat cells
Warts:
rough-surfaced growths caused by some types of human papillomavirus (HPV)
Written by
References
The American Cancer Society medical and editorial content team
Our team is made up of doctors and oncology certified nurses with deep knowledge of cancer care as well as editors and translators with extensive experience in medical writing.
Christensen SR, Wilson LD, Leffell DJ. Chapter 90: Cancer of the Skin. In: DeVita VT, Lawrence TS, Rosenberg SA, eds.
DeVita, Hellman, and Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology
. 11th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2019.
Lim JL, Asgari M. Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC): Clinical features and diagnosis. UpToDate. 2023. Accessed at https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cutaneous-squamous-cell-carcinoma-cscc-clinical-features-and-diagnosis on August 16, 2023.
Lim JL, Asgari M. Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC): Epidemiology and risk factors. UpToDate. 2023. Accessed at https://www.uptodate.com/contents/cutaneous-squamous-cell-carcinoma-epidemiology-and-risk-factors on August 16, 2023.
Wu PA. Epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma. UpToDate. 2023. Accessed at https://www.uptodate.com/contents/epidemiology-pathogenesis-clinical-features-and-diagnosis-of-basal-cell-carcinoma on August 16, 2023.
Xu YG, Aylward JL, Swanson AM, et al. Chapter 67: Nonmelanoma Skin Cancers. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Doroshow JH, Kastan MB, Tepper JE, eds.
Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology
. 6th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; 2020.
Last Revised:
November 15, 2024
American Cancer Society medical information is copyrighted material. For reprint requests, please see our
Content Usage Policy
.
American Cancer Society Emails
Sign up to stay up-to-date with news, valuable information, and ways to get involved with the American Cancer Society.
Sign Up for Email
More in Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancer
About Basal and Squamous Cell Skin Cancer
Causes, Risk Factors, and Prevention
Early Detection, Diagnosis, and Staging
Treatment
After Treatment
Help us end cancer as we know it, for everyone.
Donate with Confidence