URL: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/drugs/fluorouracil-topical

Fluorouracil (Topical)
Placeholder slot
(floor-oh-YOOR-uh-sil)
This page contains brief information about topical fluorouracil
         and a collection of links to more information about the use of 
         this drug, research results, and ongoing clinical trials.
US Brand Name(s)
Carac
Efudex
Fluoroplex
Tolak
FDA Approved
Yes
FDA label information for this drug is available at DailyMed.
Use in Cancer
Topical fluorouracil
         is approved to treat:
Actinic keratosis
.
This use is approved for the Carac, Efudex, Fluoroplex, and Tolak brands of topical fluorouracil.
The Efudex brand of topical fluorouracil is also used to treat
basal cell carcinoma
that is
superficial
. It is used in patients whose
tumors
cannot be treated with
conventional therapy
.
Fluorouracil is also called 5-FU.
Fluorouracil is also available in an
injection
form. For more information, see the Drug Information Summary for
Fluorouracil Injection
.
More About Fluorouracil (Topical)
Definition from the NCI Drug Dictionary
- Detailed scientific definition and other names for this drug.
MedlinePlus Information on
Topical Fluorouracil
- A lay language summary of important information about this drug that may include the following:
warnings about this drug,
what this drug is used for and how it is used,
what you should tell your doctor before using this drug,
what you should know about this drug before using it,
other drugs that may interact with this drug, and
possible side effects.
Drugs are often studied to find out if they can help treat or prevent conditions other than the ones they are approved for.  This patient information sheet applies only to approved uses of the drug.  However, much of the information may also apply to unapproved uses that are being studied.
Clinical Trials Accepting Patients
Find Clinical Trials for Topical Fluorouracil
- Check for trials from NCI's list of cancer clinical trials now accepting patients.
Important:
The drug information on this page is meant to be educational. It is not a substitute for medical advice. The information may not cover all possible uses, actions, interactions, or side effects of this drug, or precautions to be taken while using it. Please see your health care professional for more information about your specific medical condition and the use of this drug.