URL: https://www.mdanderson.org/prevention-screening/get-screened/skin-cancer-screening.html

Top
Jump To:
Back
Get Screened
Mammograms & Breast Examination
Cervical Cancer Screening Guidelines
Colorectal Cancer Screening Exams
Endometrial Cancer Screening Exams
Liver Cancer Screening Exams
Lung Cancer Screening Exams
Mobile Mammography Van
Ovarian Cancer Screening Exams
Prostate Cancer Screening Exams
Skin Cancer Screening Exams
Women's Cancer Screening
Men's Cancer Screening
Skin Cancer Screening Exams
Skin cancer
screening is generally recommended for people at increased risk for developing skin cancer. Not everyone with risk factors develops skin cancer. However, if you do have one or more risk factors, discuss them with your health care provider and get regular skin cancer screenings. The earlier skin cancer is found, the better the chance of it being treated successfully.
The following factors put you at increased risk for skin cancer:
Ultraviolet (UV) light exposure: Extensive lifetime sun exposure or occasional intense exposure causing a sunburn
Tanning bed use
Age: The longer you are exposed to the sun over time, the higher your risk of developing skin cancer
Having a fair complexion, blonde or red hair, freckles, blue eyes and/or a tendency to sunburn
Having 50 or more moles
There are also skin cancer risk factors linked to your personal and family medical history:
A personal or family history of skin cancer, including melanoma
Immunosuppression, typically due to taking immunosuppressive drugs
Previous serious skin injuries, such as a major scar or burn
History of actinic (solar) keratoses. These are precancerous lesions.
Familial Atypical Multiple Mole Melanoma Syndrome (FAMMMS)
Certain rare genetic disorders, including xeroderma pigmentosum and basal cell nevus syndrome
What to expect at your skin screening exam
During a skin cancer screening exam, your doctor will look all over your body for signs of actinic keratoses (precancers),
basal cell
and
squamous cell
carcinomas. They also will look for abnormal moles that can signal
melanoma
.
If your dermatologist finds a suspicious mole or growth, they will determine whether it’s best to monitor it or remove it. They may take photos to aid in monitoring the lesions.
If the mole or growth is suspicious, your doctor may recommend a skin biopsy. A biopsy will remove a part or all of the growth so that it can be sent for evaluation by a pathologist. You should get the results within a week, along with follow-up instructions from your doctor.
Dermatologists are highly skilled at recognizing problem areas on your skin. But if you have noticed any changes or have any concerning areas, be sure to point them out.
How to spot skin cancer
Whether or not you are at increased risk for skin cancer, you should be familiar with your skin and be on the lookout for spots, sores that don't heal and abnormal or changing moles. Report them to your doctor without delay.
Look for new spots or spots that change.
Watch for sores that don’t heal or heal then return.
Be aware of spots or sores that change in sensation or are itchy, tender or painful.
Check everywhere. Skin cancer can develop in places that do not get sun exposure. This includes under your arms, the soles of your feet, buttocks and genital areas.
Get help to inspect hard-to-see areas such as the scalp.
Look for areas of concern when you shampoo, shower or apply lotion.
Melanomas are often asymmetrical. That means the two sides look different from each other. They often have borders that are blurry, scalloped or jagged. Melanomas also often have many colors or are haphazardly colored. You should also look at the size. A mole that is larger than 6 millimeters, or the size of a pencil eraser, is cause for concern.
Talk with your doctor if you notice any of the ABCDEs of melanoma, or if you have a mole that is evolving or changing in size, shape or feeling.
Suspicious spots or unusual moles can be a sign of skin cancer. Talk to your doctor if you are concerned.
Exams for those who have had melanoma
If you’ve had
melanoma
(a type of skin cancer), you need a different plan to check for cancer recurrence.
Print and share MD Anderson's
melanoma survivorship chart
with your doctor. Your doctor can use this chart to develop a more tailored screening plan for you.
The screening plans on this page apply to people expected to live for at least 10 years. They’re not for people who have a health condition that may make it hard to diagnose or treat skin cancer. Your doctor can help you decide if you should continue screening after age 75.
Related articles
How to perform a self-exam for skin cancer
Learn where and how to look for spots that could be melanoma or other types of skin cancer.
Vitamin D: What you should know
Vitamin D is an important nutrient. So how do you get enough and keep your skin safe from the sun?
Patient education
Sun and skin safety
Get Screened
Cancer screening exams can detect cancer early, when the chances for successfully treating the disease are greatest.
MD Anderson offers skin cancer screenings at the following locations:
MD Anderson in Sugar Land
MD Anderson West Houston
MD Anderson The Woodlands
Texas Medical Center
Schedule a screening
Skin cancer screening: 6 things your dermatologist wants you to know
At increased risk for skin cancer? You may need regular
skin cancer screening exams
. These screening exams help find
skin cancer
early, when the chances of successful treatment are greatest.
Here,
Anisha Patel, M.D.
, shares six things she wants you to know before your skin screening exam.
You’ll be wearing a gown during the skin screening
Skin cancer can occur anywhere on your body, even places that don’t get sun exposure. During the screening, your dermatologist will conduct a head-to-toe examination, which will include your scalp, the bottom of your feet and even your genital areas. “A patient’s comfort is very important to us, but we think it’s better to endure a few moments of discomfort than to overlook a suspicious spot. It may just save your life,” Patel says.
Avoid wearing makeup and nail polish to your skin screening
Come to your skin screening without wearing makeup or nail polish. Because they cover up areas of your skin where cancer can occur, it’s best to avoid these products the day of your exam to ensure your dermatologist can do a thorough screening. “It’s fine to apply products after the screening, but plan to come to see me with clean, bare skin,” Patel says.
A machine isn’t involved in a skin screening
When walking into the examination room, some patients expect to see a machine, such as those for an MRI or CT scan, to conduct the screening. But that’s not the case. The entire screening is done with your dermatologist’s eyes or with the help of a lighted magnifying glass.
Don’t focus on cosmetic concerns
MD Anderson
specializes in cancer prevention, diagnosis and treatment, so our dermatology team focuses on skin cancers and skin cancer-related dermatologic issues. Our team and our facility aren’t equipped to address cosmetic procedures, so we suggest that you seek advice from a dermatologist who specializes in your area of concern.
If you’ve had previous skin cancer issues, bring your records
If you’ve had a skin screening in the past that resulted in a biopsy, bring your previous records to your appointment. “This will eliminate the guesswork in understanding your skin cancer risk level,” Patel says. “It may also help us reduce redundancy if you’ve had a similar procedure in the last several months. And in the case we find something suspicious, we can know what treatment you received in the past. Your past biopsy results will also help us determine the best treatment if something cancerous is found.”
The biopsy will happen the same day
If something suspicious is found during your skin screening, we’ll offer to biopsy it that day. A biopsy is the only way to find out if the area is in fact cancerous. We’ll locally numb the suspicious area of your skin and remove a small amount of tissue to send to a lab to be examined under a microscope. We’ll then cover the biopsied area with adhesive bandages and you’ll go on your way. The procedure takes only a few minutes and you should heal in just a few weeks.
We’ll know the results of your biopsy in about a week. “You shouldn’t spend the days after your skin screening worrying about biopsy results,” Patel says. “Most biopsies don’t result in a cancer diagnosis, and most of those that are skin cancer can be easily treated.  But if we do find cancer, rest assured that we’ll start working with you right away to develop a care plan that will work for you.”
Request an appointment at
MD Anderson'
s Lyda Hill Cancer Prevention Center online
or call 1-877-632-6789.
Read more
Skin cancer and melanoma prevention
5 things to know about raised moles
When people talk about moles, they are usually referring to a variety of skin growths, including true moles — which are also called nevi — freckles and other growths. However, in dermatology, a mole is a very specific type of skin growth that looks a certain way under a microscope.
Ahead, I’ll share more facts you might not know about moles, including how to tell if they are healthy.
Raised or flat doesn’t mean healthy or unhealthy
We can’t rely solely on whether a mole is raised or flat to determine if it is healthy. Some moles and skin lesions naturally grow vertically rather than horizontally. Moles that grow up and down are going to feel more raised than moles that grow laterally.
Instead of whether a mole is raised or not, start with the
ABCDE rule
to help determine if your mole may be healthy or may be exhibiting signs of
melanoma
, a type of very high-risk
skin cancer
.
A
is for asymmetry, or whether one half of the mole looks different from the other half.
B
is for border. You can tell if your mole has an unusual border if it would be challenging to outline.
C
is for color. Note if your mole is multiple colors.
D
is for diameter. Is your mole larger than the size of a pencil eraser, or about 6 millimeters?
E
is for evolving. Has your mole rapidly grown or begun to hurt, itch or bleed? If something is bleeding or painful, those are my signs that it should prompt attention.
You can also use the Ugly Duckling rule to determine if a mole may be abnormal. Ugly Duckling moles look different than your other spots. This could look like developing a black mole when all of the other moles on your body are brown.
If your mole meets any of the ABCDE criteria or follows the Ugly Duckling rule, make an appointment with a dermatologist for a
skin cancer screening exam
.
Having a high number of moles may increase your skin cancer risk
Having more moles — especially 50 or more — can increase your risk for melanoma.
If you have more than 50 moles, you are considered to have a higher risk for skin cancer and could benefit from an annual skin check with a dermatologist.
It is rarer to develop moles after age 40
Usually, after around age 40, people stop developing new moles. You can certainly develop other skin lesions after this age, though! Don’t be afraid to see a dermatologist about any type of new or rapidly changing spot on your skin, or a spot that bleeds, hurts or itches.
It’s possible to remove raised moles, but not always recommended
While it is possible to remove raised moles, many dermatologists prefer not to remove healthy-looking moles unless they bother or worry the patient. That’s because removing a mole can leave a scar. Moles can also grow back after they are removed, which can look atypical.
I also warn patients against getting moles removed by providers who aren’t dermatologists. While it isn’t common, it is possible to get a skin lesion partially removed that turns out to be cancerous. This can complicate and delay a
skin cancer diagnosis
.
If you have a mole that bothers or concerns you, talk to your dermatologist about the best way to proceed.
When in doubt, see a dermatologist
Check your skin every month. It can be hard to notice skin changes on a daily or weekly basis, but monthly check-ins allow you to note if a mole or other spot on your skin is dramatically changing.
If you wonder if a skin spot requires a trip to the dermatologist, I always recommend making an appointment. It can be hard to figure out what skin spots are normal on your own, not to mention challenging to check your own scalp or back.
At a skin screening, a dermatologist will look at your skin, sometimes with the help of a magnifying tool called a dermatascope. They may ask you questions about the history of the spot, how long it has been there and the changes that prompted your visit.
If your dermatologist sees any concerning spots, they may perform a
biopsy
. This involves removing a mole and looking at it underneath a microscope to diagnose if it is cancerous.
Another benefit of making an appointment with a dermatologist for a full body skin assessment? Your dermatologist can keep an eye on any skin changes that happen over time. In this case, preventive care is as simple as taking a look at your skin.
Request an appointment at
MD Anderson
online
or call
1-877-632-6789
.
Read more
We're here for you.
Call us at
1-877-632-6789
or
request an appointment online.
Let's get started.
Request an appointment online.
Call
Request appointment
MyChart
Help #EndCancer
Give Now
Your gift will help make a tremendous difference.
Donate
Donate Blood
Our patients depend on blood and platelet donations.
Make an appointment
Shop MD Anderson
Show your support for our mission through branded merchandise.
View products