URL: https://www.cancer.org.au/cancer-information/types-of-cancer/skin-cancer

131120
Media
Shop Online
Contact Us
MENU
Donate
Set your location
ACT
NSW
NT
QLD
SA
TAS
VIC
WA
Clear Selection
ACT
NSW
NT
QLD
SA
TAS
VIC
WA
Clear Selection
Media
Shop Online
Contact Us
Cancer information
What is cancer?
Common cancer symptoms
Facts and figures
Explore What is cancer?
Causes and prevention
Early detection and screening
Sun safety
Check for signs of skin cancer
Diet and exercise
Smoking and tobacco
Family history and cancer
Environmental causes
Workplace cancer
Explore Causes and prevention
Types of cancer
Adenocarcinoma
Anal cancer
Bladder cancer
Bone cancer
Bowel cancer
Brain cancer
Breast cancer
Breast cancer in men
Cancer of unknown primary
Cervical cancer
Children, teens, and young adult cancers
Head and neck cancers
Hodgkin lymphoma
Kidney cancer
Leukaemia
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Lymphoma
Melanoma
Mesothelioma
Mouth cancer
Myeloma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-melanoma skin cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Ovarian cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Prostate cancer
Rare cancers
Secondary bone cancer
Skin cancer
Stomach cancer
Testicular cancer
Throat cancer
Thyroid cancer
Uterine cancer
Vaginal cancer
Vulvar cancer
Explore Types of cancer
Tests and scans
After a diagnosis
Coping with a cancer diagnosis
Your guides to best cancer care
Telling friends and family
Find a specialist
Questions to ask your doctor
Hospital visits for cancer patients and carers
Telehealth for cancer patients and carers
Living with cancer
After cancer treatment
Explore After a diagnosis
Treatment
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy (radiotherapy)
Surgery
Complementary therapies
Hormone therapy
Immunotherapy
Clinical trials
Palliative care
Targeted therapy
Advanced cancer treatment
Explore Treatment
Cancer side effects
Breast prostheses and reconstruction
Changes in thinking and memory
Fatigue
Fertility
Hair loss
Mouth health
Neutropenia
Peripheral neuropathy
Sexuality and intimacy
Taste and smell changes
Explore Cancer side effects
Oncology
Downloadable resources
See all Cancer information
Support and Services
Support and Services
Cancer Council 13 11 20
State based service finder
Support groups
Transport services
Wig service
Cancer support and information centres
Children, adolescents and young adults
Cancer and COVID-19
Information for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
Multilingual resources
Cancer, work and you
Practical and financial assistance
Workshops and forums
Ostomy Service
Cancer Nurses
Explore Support and Services
Online resources
Cancer Council Online Community
iHeard
Podcasts
eLearning
Trusted resources
Explore Online resources
Personal cancer stories
See all Support and Services
Get involved
Donate
One time donation
Regular giving
In memoriam
In celebration
Where your money goes
Workplace Giving
Explore Donate
Fundraising and events
Upcoming Events and Programs
Australia's Biggest Morning Tea
Daffodil Day Appeal
Relay For Life
Girls' Night In
Dry July
The March Charge
The Longest Day
Ponytail Project
Community fundraising
Gala Events
Entertainment books
Donation tins
Healthy fundraising
Men’s Health Pitstop
Explore Fundraising and events
Bequests
Wording for your will
Explore Bequests
Volunteer
Shop with us
Shop online
Find a stockist
Clothes4Cancer Op Shop
Explore Shop with us
See all Get involved
Health professionals
Clinical Practice Guidelines
Clinical Guidelines Network
Cancer Council research programs
National Secondary Students' Diet and Activity (NaSSDA) survey
Research Opportunities, Grants and Scholarships
Explore Cancer Council research programs
Optimal Care Pathways
Patient resources
Resources for health professionals
Informed financial consent
Inequalities in  cancer outcomes
Caring for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
Warning signs of cancer in children
Online learning
Australian Cancer Atlas
Cancer Forum
Diverse Languages and Cultures
Explore Resources for health professionals
Conferences and events
See all Health professionals
About us
How we help
Research
Prevention
Support
Looking Ahead
Explore How we help
Policy and Advocacy
Prevention Policy
Early detection policy
Treatment and care policy
Health systems and populations policy
Advocacy and government submissions
Explore Policy and Advocacy
News and Media
Media releases
News
Blog
Our spokespeople
Media contacts
Explore News and Media
About Cancer Council
Cancer Council Australia
Cancer Council ACT
Cancer Council NSW
Cancer Council NT
Cancer Council Queensland
Cancer Council SA
Cancer Council Tasmania
Cancer Council Victoria
Cancer Council WA
Explore About Cancer Council
National committees
Partnerships
Affiliations
Corporate partnerships
Endorsed Sun Protection Brands
Explore Partnerships
Contact us
Work with us
Jobs
Explore Work with us
See all About us
/
...
/
Cancer information
/
Types of cancer
/
Skin cancer
Types of Cancer
Skin cancer
SKIN CANCER BOOKLET: EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW
READ MORE ON:
Non-melanoma skin cancer
READ MORE ON:
Melanoma
Jump to section:
Jump to section
About skin cancer
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Screening and Early Detection
Prevention
Prognosis
What is skin cancer?
Skin cancer occurs when skin cells are damaged, for example, by overexposure to
ultraviolet (UV) radiation
from the sun.
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment
There are three main types of skin cancer:
basal cell carcinoma (BCC)
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
melanoma
- the most dangerous form of skin cancer.
Both basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are known as non-melanoma skin cancer or keratinocyte cancers. Keratinocyte cancer is more common in men, with almost double the incidence compared to women.
Melanoma is the third most common cancer in Australians excluding keratinocyte cancers as data on incidence is not routinely collected).
There are also rare types of skin cancer including Merkel cell carcinoma and angiosarcoma. These are treated differently from BCC and SCC.
Every year, in Australia:
skin cancers account for around 80% of all newly diagnosed cancers
the majority of skin cancers are caused by exposure to the sun
the incidence of skin cancer is one of the highest in the world, two to three times the rates in Canada, the US and the UK.
Learn more about how Cancer Council funded researchers are working on
curing Australia’s national cancer
.
Skin cancer signs and symptoms
The sooner a skin cancer is identified and treated, the better your chance of avoiding surgery or, in the case of a serious melanoma or other skin cancer, potential disfigurement or even death.
It is also a good idea to talk to your doctor about your level of risk and for advice on early detection.
Become familiar with the look of your skin, particularly spots and
moles
, so you pick up any changes that might suggest a skin cancer.
Look for:
any crusty, non-healing sores
small lumps that are red, pale or pearly in colour
new spots, freckles or any moles changing in colour, thickness or shape over a period of weeks to months
Causes of skin cancer
Australia has one of the highest rates of skin cancer in the world. Anyone can be at risk of developing skin cancer, though the risk increases as you get older.
The majority of skin cancers in Australia are caused by exposure to
UV radiation
in sunlight.
Some factors that increase your risk of skin cancer include:
sunburn
tanning
solariums
Read More
Diagnosis of skin cancer
It is important to check your skin regularly and check with your doctor if you notice any changes.
In the majority of cases, your GP will examine you, paying attention to any spots that may look suspicious. Your GP may perform a biopsy (remove a small sample of tissue for examination under a microscope). In some cases your GP may refer you to a specialist, such as a dermatologist, if necessary.
Skin cancer clinics
Usually operated by GPs, skin cancer clinics can offer a variety of services. Some clinics are run by dermatologists.
Skin cancer clinics may not offer higher levels of expertise than your GP, so it is important to look into what services are offered and the training of the staff.
When choosing a skin cancer clinic consider:
staff - qualifications and experience
costs
diagnosis and services offered
follow-up provided.
Cancer Council does not operate or recommend any particular skin cancer clinics or doctors.
Treatment for skin cancer
Skin cancers are almost always removed. In more advanced skin cancers, some of the surrounding tissue may also be removed to make sure that all of the cancerous cells have been taken out.
The most common treatment for skin cancer is
surgery
to remove the cancer (usually under a local anaesthetic). Common skin cancers can be treated with ointments or
radiation therapy
(radiotherapy). Skin cancer can also be removed with cryotherapy (using liquid nitrogen to rapidly freeze the cancer off), curettage (scraping) or cautery (burning).
For more detailed information about skin cancer please phone
Cancer Council 13 11 20
or talk to your GP.
Palliative care
In some cases of skin cancer, your medical team may talk to you about
palliative care
. Palliative care aims to improve your quality of life by alleviating symptoms of cancer.
As well as slowing the spread of skin cancer, palliative treatment can relieve pain and help manage other symptoms. Treatment may include radiotherapy, chemotherapy or other drug therapies.
Treatment Team
Depending on your treatment, your treatment team may consist of a number of different health professionals, such as:
GP (General Practitioner)  -
looks after your general health and works with your specialists to coordinate treatment.
Dermatologist -
specialises in preventing, diagnosing and treating skin diseases.
Surgeon -
Surgeon which can be a general surgeon, a surgical oncologist to manage complex skin cancers or a plastic surgeon trained in complex constructive techniques, including surgery if the cancer has spread.
Radiation or medical oncologist -
A radiation oncologist prescribes and oversees a course of radiation therapy, which may be used to treat some skin cancers
Screening for skin cancer
There is currently no formal screening program for skin cancers in Australia. It is recommended that people become familiar with their skin. If you notice any changes consult your doctor.
You can also explore our section on
how to check your skin for signs of skin cancer
.
Download Cancer Council's skin cancer identification poster to help identify potential skin cancers:
Cancer Council's skin cancer identification poster
Download the PDF
Preventing skin cancer
Protect your skin
For best protection, when the UV level is 3 or above, we recommend a combination of sun protection measures:
Slip on some sun-protective clothing - that covers as much skin as possible.
Slop on SPF50 or SPF50+, broad-spectrum, water-resistant sunscreen. Put it on 20 minutes before you go outdoors and every two hours afterwards. Sunscreen should never be used to extend the time you spend in the sun.
Slap on a hat - that protects your face, head, neck and ears.
Seek shade.
Slide on some sunglasses - make sure they meet Australian standards.
Be extra cautious in the middle of the day when UV levels are most intense.
For further information please visit our page on
preventing skin cancer
.
Prognosis for skin cancer
It is not possible for a doctor to predict the exact course of a disease. However, your doctor may give you the likely outcome of the disease. If detected early, most skin cancers are successfully treated.
Most non-melanoma skin cancers do not pose a serious risk to your health but a cancer diagnosis can be a shock. If you want to talk to someone see your doctor. You can also call Cancer Council 13 11 20.
Sources
Understanding Skin Cancer
, Cancer Council Australia, © 2024. Last medical review of source booklet: January 2024. We thank the reviewers of this booklet: A/Prof Victoria Mar, Director, Victorian Melanoma Service, Alfred Hospital and Monash University, VIC; Tracey Bilson, Consumer; Raelene Buchan, Consumer; Alison Button-Sloan, Consumer; Dr Margaret Chua, Radiation Oncologist, and the Skin Radiation Oncology team, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, VIC; Prof Anne Cust, Deputy Director, The Daffodil Centre, The University of Sydney and Cancer Council NSW, Chair, National Skin Cancer Committee, Cancer Council, and faculty member, Melanoma Institute Australia; A/Prof Paul Fishburn, Skin Cancer Doctor, Norwest Skin Cancer Centre, NSW and Faculty of Medicine, University of Queensland; Danielle Goss, Melanoma Clinical Nurse Specialist, Amie St Clair Melanoma (part of Melanoma Institute Australia), Wagga Wagga, NSW; Louise Pellerade, 13 11 20 Consultant, Cancer Council WA: Dr Shireen Sidhu, Head of Dermatology, The Royal Adelaide Hospital, SA; Dr Amelia Smit, Research Fellow – Melanoma and Skin Cancer, The Daffodil Centre, The University of Sydney and Cancer Council NSW; Dr Tony Tonks, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeon, Canberra Plastic Surgery, ACT.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW).
Australian Cancer Incidence and Mortality (ACIM) books
. Canberra: AIHW.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. Cancer data in Australia [Internet]. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2024 Available from:
https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/cancer/cancer-data-in-australia
Last updated:
14 August 2024
READ MORE ON:
Non-melanoma skin cancer
READ MORE ON:
Melanoma
For more information:
Preventing skin cancer
Sun safety
13 11 20