URL: https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/seasonal-health/sunscreen-and-sun-safety/

Sunscreen and sun safety
Advice for adults and children on sunscreen and sun safety in the UK and abroad.
Sunburn increases your risk of skin cancer. Sunburn does not just happen on holiday. You can burn in the UK, even when it's cloudy.
There's no safe or healthy way to get a tan. A tan does not protect your skin from the sun's harmful effects.
Aim to strike a balance between protecting yourself from the sun and getting enough vitamin D from sunlight.
Sun safety tips
Spend time in the shade when the sun is strongest. In the UK, this is between 11am and 3pm from March to October.
Make sure you:
spend time in the shade between 11am and 3pm
never burn
cover up with suitable clothing and sunglasses
take extra care with children
use at least factor 30 sunscreen
What factor sunscreen (SPF) should I use?
Do not rely on sunscreen alone to protect yourself from the sun. Wear suitable clothing and spend time in the shade when the sun's at its hottest.
When buying sunscreen, the label should have:
a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 30 to protect against UVB
at least 4-star UVA protection
UVA protection can also be indicated by the letters "UVA" in a circle, which indicates that it meets the EU standard.
Make sure the sunscreen is not past its expiry date.
Do not spend any longer in the sun than you would without sunscreen.
What are the SPF and star rating?
The sun protection factor, or SPF, is a measure of the amount of ultraviolet B radiation (UVB) protection.
SPFs are rated on a scale of 2 to 50+ based on the level of protection they offer, with 50+ offering the strongest form of UVB protection.
The star rating measures the amount of ultraviolet A radiation (UVA) protection. You should see a star rating of up to 5 stars on UK sunscreens. The higher the star rating, the better.
The letters "UVA" inside a circle is a European marking. This means the UVA protection is at least a third of the SPF value and meets EU recommendations.
Sunscreens that offer both UVA and UVB protection are sometimes called broad spectrum.
How to apply sunscreen
Most people do not apply enough sunscreen.
As a guide, adults should aim to apply around 6 to 8 teaspoons of sunscreen if you're covering your entire body.
If sunscreen is applied too thinly, the amount of protection it gives is reduced.
If you're worried you might not be applying enough SPF30, you could use a sunscreen with a higher SPF.
If you plan to be out in the sun long enough to risk burning, sunscreen needs to be applied twice:
30 minutes before going out
just before going out
Sunscreen should be applied to all exposed skin, including the face, neck and ears, and head if you have thinning or no hair, but a wide-brimmed hat is better.
Sunscreen needs to be reapplied liberally and frequently, and according to the manufacturer's instructions.
This includes applying it straight after you have been in water, even if it's "water resistant", and after towel drying, sweating or when it may have rubbed off.
It's also recommended to reapply sunscreen every 2 hours, as the sun can dry it off your skin.
Swimming and sunscreen
Water washes sunscreen off, and the cooling effect of the water can make you think you're not getting burned. Water also reflects ultraviolet (UV) rays, increasing your exposure.
Use water-resistant sunscreen if it's likely you'll sweat or have contact with water.
Sunscreen should be reapplied straight after you have been in water, even if it's "water resistant", and after towel drying, sweating or when it may have rubbed off.
Children and sun protection
Take extra care to protect babies and children. Their skin is much more sensitive than adult skin, and damage caused by repeated exposure to sunlight could lead to skin cancer developing in later life.
Children aged under 6 months should be kept out of direct strong sunlight.
From March to October in the UK, children should:
cover up with suitable clothing
spend time in the shade, particularly from 11am to 3pm
wear at least SPF30 sunscreen
Apply sunscreen to areas not protected by clothing, such as the face, ears, feet and backs of hands.
To ensure they get enough vitamin D, all
children under 5 are advised to take vitamin D supplements
.
Protect your eyes in the sun
A day at the beach without proper eye protection can cause a temporary but painful burn to the surface of the eye, similar to sunburn.
Reflected sunlight from snow, sand, concrete and water, and artificial light from sunbeds, is particularly dangerous.
Avoid looking directly at the sun, as this can cause permanent eye damage.
Clothing and sunglasses
Wear clothes and sunglasses that provide sun protection, such as:
a wide-brimmed hat that shades the face, neck and ears
a long-sleeved top
trousers or long skirts in close-weave fabrics that do not allow sunlight through
sunglasses with wraparound lenses or wide arms with the CE Mark and British Standard Mark 12312-1:2013 E
How to deal with sunburn
Sponge sore skin with cool water, then apply soothing aftersun cream or spray, like aloe vera.
Painkillers, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen, will ease the pain by helping to reduce inflammation caused by sunburn.
Stay out of the sun until all signs of redness have gone.
Find out more about treating sunburn
Seek medical help if you feel unwell or the skin swells badly or blisters. Stay out of the sun until all signs of redness have gone.
Get tips on preventing and treating heat exhaustion in hot weather
Who should take extra care in the sun?
You should take extra care in the sun if you:
have pale, white or light brown skin
have freckles or red or fair hair
tend to burn rather than tan
have many moles
have skin problems relating to a medical condition
are only exposed to intense sun occasionally (for example, while on holiday)
are in a hot country where the sun is particularly intense
have a family history of skin cancer
People who spend a lot of time in the sun, whether it's for work or play, are at increased risk of skin cancer if they do not take the right precautions.
If you have naturally brown or black skin you are less likely to get skin cancer, as darker skin has some protection against UV rays. You may also need more time in sunlight to produce the same amount of vitamin D as people with lighter skin. But you should still avoid burning and take care in the sun as people of all skin tones can get skin cancer.
Protect your moles
If you have lots of moles or freckles, your risk of getting
skin cancer
is higher than average, so take extra care.
Avoid getting caught out by sunburn. Use shade, clothing and a sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30 to protect yourself.
Keep an eye out for changes to your skin.
Changes to check for include:
a new mole, growth or lump
any moles, freckles or patches of skin that change in size, shape or colour
Report these to your doctor as soon as possible. Skin cancer is much easier to treat if it's found early.
Using sunbeds
The British Association of Dermatologists advises that people should not use sunbeds or sunlamps.
Sunbeds and lamps can be more dangerous than natural sunlight because they use a concentrated source of UV radiation.
Health risks linked to sunbeds and other UV tanning equipment include:
skin cancer
premature skin ageing
sunburnt skin
eye irritation
It's illegal for people under the age of 18 to use sunbeds, including in tanning salons, beauty salons, leisure centres, gyms and hotels.
Find out if sunbeds are safe
More in
Seasonal health
Page last reviewed: 19 December 2022
Next review due: 19 December 2025