URL: https://www.cancer.org.au/blog/protecting-your-skin-from-incidental-sun-exposure

131120
Media
Shop Online
Contact Us
MENU
Donate
Set your location
ACT
NSW
NT
QLD
SA
TAS
VIC
WA
Clear Selection
ACT
NSW
NT
QLD
SA
TAS
VIC
WA
Clear Selection
Media
Shop Online
Contact Us
Cancer information
What is cancer?
Common cancer symptoms
Facts and figures
Explore What is cancer?
Causes and prevention
Early detection and screening
Sun safety
Check for signs of skin cancer
Diet and exercise
Smoking and tobacco
Family history and cancer
Environmental causes
Workplace cancer
Explore Causes and prevention
Types of cancer
Adenocarcinoma
Anal cancer
Bladder cancer
Bone cancer
Bowel cancer
Brain cancer
Breast cancer
Breast cancer in men
Cancer of unknown primary
Cervical cancer
Children, teens, and young adult cancers
Head and neck cancers
Hodgkin lymphoma
Kidney cancer
Leukaemia
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Lymphoma
Melanoma
Mesothelioma
Mouth cancer
Myeloma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-melanoma skin cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Ovarian cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Prostate cancer
Rare cancers
Secondary bone cancer
Skin cancer
Stomach cancer
Testicular cancer
Throat cancer
Thyroid cancer
Uterine cancer
Vaginal cancer
Vulvar cancer
Explore Types of cancer
Tests and scans
After a diagnosis
Coping with a cancer diagnosis
Your guides to best cancer care
Telling friends and family
Find a specialist
Questions to ask your doctor
Hospital visits for cancer patients and carers
Telehealth for cancer patients and carers
Living with cancer
After cancer treatment
Explore After a diagnosis
Treatment
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy (radiotherapy)
Surgery
Complementary therapies
Hormone therapy
Immunotherapy
Clinical trials
Palliative care
Targeted therapy
Advanced cancer treatment
Explore Treatment
Cancer side effects
Breast prostheses and reconstruction
Changes in thinking and memory
Fatigue
Fertility
Hair loss
Mouth health
Neutropenia
Peripheral neuropathy
Sexuality and intimacy
Taste and smell changes
Explore Cancer side effects
Oncology
Downloadable resources
See all Cancer information
Support and Services
Support and Services
Cancer Council 13 11 20
State based service finder
Support groups
Transport services
Wig service
Cancer support and information centres
Children, adolescents and young adults
Cancer and COVID-19
Information for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
Multilingual resources
Cancer, work and you
Practical and financial assistance
Workshops and forums
Ostomy Service
Cancer Nurses
Explore Support and Services
Online resources
Cancer Council Online Community
iHeard
Podcasts
eLearning
Trusted resources
Explore Online resources
Personal cancer stories
See all Support and Services
Get involved
Donate
One time donation
Regular giving
In memoriam
In celebration
Where your money goes
Workplace Giving
Explore Donate
Fundraising and events
Upcoming Events and Programs
Australia's Biggest Morning Tea
Daffodil Day Appeal
Relay For Life
Girls' Night In
Dry July
The March Charge
The Longest Day
Ponytail Project
Community fundraising
Gala Events
Entertainment books
Donation tins
Healthy fundraising
Men’s Health Pitstop
Explore Fundraising and events
Bequests
Wording for your will
Explore Bequests
Volunteer
Shop with us
Shop online
Find a stockist
Clothes4Cancer Op Shop
Explore Shop with us
See all Get involved
Health professionals
Clinical Practice Guidelines
Clinical Guidelines Network
Cancer Council research programs
National Secondary Students' Diet and Activity (NaSSDA) survey
Research Opportunities, Grants and Scholarships
Explore Cancer Council research programs
Optimal Care Pathways
Patient resources
Resources for health professionals
Informed financial consent
Inequalities in  cancer outcomes
Caring for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
Warning signs of cancer in children
Online learning
Australian Cancer Atlas
Cancer Forum
Diverse Languages and Cultures
Explore Resources for health professionals
Conferences and events
See all Health professionals
About us
How we help
Research
Prevention
Support
Looking Ahead
Explore How we help
Policy and Advocacy
Prevention Policy
Early detection policy
Treatment and care policy
Health systems and populations policy
Advocacy and government submissions
Explore Policy and Advocacy
News and Media
Media releases
News
Blog
Our spokespeople
Media contacts
Explore News and Media
About Cancer Council
Cancer Council Australia
Cancer Council ACT
Cancer Council NSW
Cancer Council NT
Cancer Council Queensland
Cancer Council SA
Cancer Council Tasmania
Cancer Council Victoria
Cancer Council WA
Explore About Cancer Council
National committees
Partnerships
Affiliations
Corporate partnerships
Endorsed Sun Protection Brands
Explore Partnerships
Contact us
Work with us
Jobs
Explore Work with us
See all About us
/
...
/
About us
/
News and Media
/
Cancer Council Blog
/
Protecting your skin from incidental sun exposure
Blog
Protecting your skin from incidental sun exposure
13 November 2024
Author
Cancer Council Australia
It’s time to make sun protection a habit! National Skin Cancer Action Week 2024 runs from 17-23 November and this year we urge all Australians to make sun protection part of their daily routine, all year round—and not just when you head to the beach or pool.
As summer approaches, Australians are reminded to think about those day-to-day activities where they can be exposed to UV radiation. It doesn’t take long for skin damage to occur, which increases the risk of developing skin cancer.
Incidental sun exposure—those unplanned moments spent outside at a café, walking the dog, or waiting for a bus—can really add up. The UV index will reach extreme levels across Australia over the summer, so we encourage Australians to be prepared before heading outside. Remember to make sure you protect your skin using all five forms of sun protection: Slip, Slop, Slap, Seek and Slide.
Australia’s national cancer
Australia has the highest rate of skin cancer in the world. In fact, it is estimated that two in three Australians will develop skin cancer in their lifetime—a sobering thought.
Skin cancer can be prevented. By following the five SunSmart steps, you can significantly reduce your risk, at any age. Let’s dive into what incidental sun exposure is and how you can protect yourself from harmful UV radiation.
What is incidental sun exposure?
Protecting your skin at the beach or if you plan to be outside is, of course, extremely important, but incidental sun exposure—those moments when you’re exposed to UV radiation without thinking about it, are just as important.
Imagine you’re walking to work, heading to the shops, putting out the washing or running errands outside. It’s these seemingly innocuous moments that can accumulate, leaving your skin vulnerable to damage.
To find out how UV penetrates the skin and how long it takes before the damage begins, we consulted Dr Adriene Lee, President of the Australasian College of Dermatologists. Dermatologists are specialists trained in the diagnosis and treatment of all skin diseases including skin cancer.
Dr Lee explains that there are two types of UV radiation from the sun; UVA and UVB, that reach the Earth’s surface. UVA penetrates deeper layers of the skin which can trigger chemical reactions and damage the DNA of the skin cells.
“UVA also breaks down the collagen and elastic tissue in the skin causing thick, leathery, aged skin with wrinkles, pigmentation, dryness and broken blood vessels.”
However, UVB can be harsher,
“as it gets into the DNA in the outer skin cells and damages it directly. Your cells can try to repair the damage but eventually with more UVB exposure, there is more damage to the DNA and the cells can’t keep up with the repair.”
Exposure to UVA and UVB radiation can cause pre-cancerous skin spots and skin cancers including melanoma, squamous cell and basal cell carcinomas.
“It does not take long for UV to damage the skin. The more incidental episodes of sun exposure you have, the more likely this build-up of UV damage to your cells will cause a skin cancer in the future.”
The five SunSmart steps
Whether you’re just stepping out, exercising, commuting or walking the dog, these five steps can keep you protected:
1.
Slip on protective clothing
Choose outfits that cover as much of your body as possible—think shirts with long sleeves and loose-fitting pants. Some fabrics even come with an ultraviolet protection factor (UPF) rating to help you gauge their effectiveness.
2.
Slop on SPF50 or SPF50+ broad-spectrum, water-resistant sunscreen
Apply a generous amount of SPF50 or SPF 50+ sunscreen to clean, dry skin at least 20 minutes before heading outside. This is so it has time to bind to your skin.
Reapply your sunscreen every two hours—you could even set reminders on your phone, so you don’t forget! But remember, sunscreen is your last line of defence so always combine it with the other sun protective measures.
3.
Slap on a broad-brimmed hat
A hat is essential if you’re heading outside. Choose a broad-brimmed, legionnaire or bucket-style hat that covers your face, neck and ears. These are common spots for skin cancers to develop and can easily be forgotten. Caps are not recommended as they don’t provide full protection for the face, ears and neck. Leave a suitable hat in your car or by your door so you’re always prepared!
4.
Seek shade
Seek shade under the trees, structures or an umbrella with a high UPF rating. Just keep in mind that UV rays can reflect off surfaces, especially if you’re near water, so make sure you combine shade with other protective measures.
5.
Slide on some sunglasses
Don’t forget your sunnies! A good pair of wraparound sunglasses, when worn with a broad-brimmed hat, can block up to 98% of UV radiation from reaching your eyes. Choose close-fitting ones that meet Australian Standards for optimal protection. Keeping a pair in your glove box or everyday bag is a good way to make sure they are always nearby.
Small changes can mean BIG protection
Protecting your skin can become part of your routine. Just a moment of simple planning each day can make a world of difference. And remember, it’s never too late to start. Your future self (and skin) will thank you!
Dr Lee says,
“If you have had a lot of UV exposure over the years, and you have other risk factors such as fair skin, you are at a higher risk of skin cancer. You should check your skin regularly and if you see something new or changing, see a GP or dermatologist.”
Get inspired: Conquering Skin Cancer
Conquering Skin Cancer
is a documentary and campaign aimed at reducing skin cancer rates and deaths. Through compelling interviews with survivors, experts, and celebrities, it advocates for enhanced prevention, early detection, equitable access to treatment, and innovative research.
Find out what it means to stay safe in a high UV environment. Catch it in cinemas this summer.
So, as you sip your morning coffee or take that leisurely stroll, keep these tips in mind. Keep your skin safe and beautiful and enjoy the sunshine with peace of mind.
✕
Resources
To understand more about why sun exposure causes skin cancer, visit our
no-nonsense UV low-down
.
Find out how why we need to End The Trend of dangerous suntanning culture at
Skin Cancer - End The Trend | Cancer Council
Article written by Claire Wharton and Georgie Price, Cancer Council Australia and co-authored by Dr Adriene Lee, President of the Australasian College of Dermatologists.
Share this:
Tags
prevention
skin cancer
Next Article
What’s next in your NETs experience? Know what to expect at every step
Recent Blogs
Protecting your skin from incidental sun exposure
What’s next in your NETs experience? Know what to expect at every step
Real stories: Raymond Mee
The job's not done until we're all safe in the sun