URL: https://www.healthdirect.gov.au/squamous-cell-carcinoma

beginning of content
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
6-minute read
Print
Share
share via Facebook
share via Email
Save
Share via email
There is a total of
5
error
s
on this form, details are below.
Please enter your name
Please enter your email
Your email is invalid.
                    Please check and try again
Please enter recipient's
                    email
Recipient's email is invalid.
                    Please check and try again
Agree to Terms required
Thank you for sharing our content. A message has been sent to your recipient's email address with a link
              to the content webpage.
Your name:
is required
Error:
This is required
Your email:
is required
Error:
This is required
Error:
Not a valid value
Send to:
is required
Error:
This is required
Error:
Not a valid value
Error:
This is required
I have read and
                agree to the
Terms of Use
and
Privacy Policy
is required
.
Listen
Key facts
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a common type of skin cancer that occurs on your skin in places where you’ve been exposed to sun.
If you notice a sore, scab or scaly patch of skin that doesn’t heal within 2 months, see a doctor.
It’s usually possible for a doctor to completely remove your SCC.
The best way to prevent SCC is to avoid sunburn.
Check your skin regularly so you will notice any changes.
What is squamous cell carcinoma?
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is one of the most common forms of skin cancer. SCC is not as dangerous as
melanoma
, but it can spread to other parts of your body if not treated. Every year, people in Australia die from aggressive SCCs.
What are the types of squamous cell carcinoma?
Squamous cell carcinoma develops when the flat cells in the top layer of your skin (called squamous cells) grow and divide in an uncontrolled way.
You can get SCC wherever you have squamous cells — which is in many different parts of your body. However, typically they appear on parts of your skin that have been exposed to a lot of ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun or from tanning beds.
An early form of
skin cancer
, called
Bowen's disease
, which looks like a red, scaly patch, can also develop into an SCC if not treated.
SCC can be quite an aggressive cancer if left untreated. If you ever notice a sore, scab or scaly patch of skin that doesn’t heal within 2 months, see a doctor.
What are the symptoms of squamous cell carcinoma?
The first sign of an SCC is usually a thickened, red, scaly spot on your skin that doesn’t heal. You are most likely to find an SCC on the back of your hands, forearms, legs, scalp, ears or lips. If it’s on your lips, it can look like a small ulcer or patch of scaly skin that doesn’t go away.
Your SCC may also look like:
a crusted sore
a small ulcer or thickened scaly skin on the lips
a patch of skin that's sore
a firm, red lump
a sore or rough patch inside your mouth
a red, raised sore around your anus or genitals
An SCC will probably grow quickly over several weeks or months.
How is squamous cell carcinoma diagnosed?
If you think you might have an SCC, see your doctor. They may send you to see a
dermatologist
(a skin specialist).
If you go to a dermatologist, they will examine you and may take a small sample from the sore to test in the lab. This is known as a
biopsy
.
How is squamous cell carcinoma treated?
It is usually possible to completely remove your SCC. The best type of treatment for you will depend on the size and location of your SCC.
Usually, the doctor will remove your SCC using
simple skin surgery
. They will then look at the area under a microscope to check all the cancer has been removed. If it has spread, you might need
radiotherapy
afterwards.
Other ways of removing the SCC are:
scraping it off then sealing the base of the wound with an electric needle or liquid nitrogen
freezing it off
After treatment, you will need follow-up appointments with your doctor. You will be at greater risk of developing another skin cancer, so it’s more important than ever to
protect your skin from the sun
.
If your SCC has spread, you may be treated with an
immunotherapy
medicine given into your vein called
cemiplimab
.
When should I see my doctor?
Not all sores on your skin are skin cancer. But if you do develop skin cancer, the earlier it is treated, the better your outcome.
Most people find SCCs by checking their own skin. Check your skin regularly so you notice any changes.
See a doctor if:
you have a sore that doesn't heal in 2 months
you notice a new and unusual looking spot
your existing spot changes in colour, size or shape
you have a spot that is asymmetrical (irregular and not round or oval)
you have a spot with an uneven border
you have a spot with an unusual or uneven colour
you have a spot that is larger than 7mm
Read the article
Should I be checked for skin cancer?
FIND A HEALTH SERVICE
— The
Service Finder
can help you find doctors, pharmacies, hospitals and other health services.
ASK YOUR DOCTOR
— Preparing for an appointment? Use the
Question Builder
for general tips on what to ask your GP or specialist.
Can I prevent squamous cell carcinoma?
The best way to prevent SCC is to avoid
sunburn
. Avoid going out in the sun when the UV Index is higher than 3, such as in the middle of the day. Seek shade, wear a hat, sunglasses and clothing that protects you from the sun, and always use an SPF30+ (or higher) sunscreen. Do not go to tanning salons.
If you are at very high risk of developing another skin cancer, your doctor may prescribe you specific vitamins.
Resources and support
Sunsmart
— a global UV app for information about sun safety, as well as up to date advice, resources and policies.
Cancer Council Australia
— for more information about sun safety and checking for and preventing skin cancers.
The Australasian College of Dermatologists
— for more information about SCCs.
Bureau of Meteorology UV Index
— for information about the UV index and sun protection times.
Learn more here about the
development and quality assurance of healthdirect content
.
Last reviewed: February 2023
Back To
Top