URL: https://www.macmillan.org.uk/cancer-information-and-support/skin-cancer

Skin cancer
On this page
What is skin cancer?
Skin cancer symptoms
Skin cancer risk factors
Skin cancer diagnosis
Skin cancer treatment
After skin cancer treatment
About our information
How we can help
Get information about specific cancer types
Answer a few quick questions to get customised content and support for you.
Get your personal guide
What is skin cancer?
There are several types of cancer that may start in
the skin
. They can be split into 2 groups depending on the cell they develop from:
melanoma
non-melanoma, including basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
The structure of the skin
Image: The diagram shows the structure of the skin. The epidermis is the top layer of the skin. It is made up mainly of squamous cells. The bottom layer of the epidermis is made of basal cells and melanocytes. Beneath the epidermis is the dermis. The dermis contains nerves, blood vessels, and sweat glands. Hairs grow from the base of the dermis up through the epidermis to above the skin. Beneath the dermis is a layer of fat.
Melanoma skin cancers
Melanoma skin cancers include superficial spreading melanoma, nodular melanoma, lentigo maligna melanoma and acral lentiginous melanoma. These types develop from skin cells called melanocytes. We have separate information about
melanoma
. It is treated differently to non-melanoma skin cancers.
Non-melanoma skin cancers
Non-melanoma skin cancers include basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
BCC is the most common type of skin cancer in the UK. It starts in skin cells called basal cells.
SCC is the second most common type of skin cancer in the UK. It develops from the squamous cell layers of the skin.
There are some other
types of cancer
that can affect the skin. These are much less common than BCC and SCC. They are treated differently. We have separate information about the following types:
Kaposi’s sarcoma
cutaneous lymphoma
sarcoma
.
Related pages
What is cancer?
The skin
Types of skin cancer
Related video
Booklets
30 Sep 2024
Understanding non-melanoma skin cancer
A booklet explaining non-melanoma skin cancer, covering the causes, types of non-melanoma skin cancer, and...
Audiobooks
01 Sep 2024
Understanding non-melanoma skin cancer
This information is for people who have, or are having tests for, skin cancer. We have also listed other...
Skin cancer symptoms
Skin cancers can vary in how they look. Always make an appointment with your GP if you have:
a new or changing mole
any other unusual or unexplained skin changes
an itch or sore that will not go away.
It might help to take a photograph of anything unusual, so you can check for any changes. Remember that there are many other skin conditions that are not cancer, especially in older people.
We have more information about possible symptoms of:
melanoma
basal cell carcinoma
and
squamous cell carcinoma
.
Related pages
Do I have cancer?
Skin cancer risk factors
The biggest risk factor for skin cancer is exposure to ultraviolet light (UV light). This can be through sunlight, or indoor tanning devices such as sunbeds. You can find out more about this and other possible
causes and risk factors of skin cancer
.
Staying safe in the sun is important for everyone, but it is especially important if you have already had skin cancer or treatment for another type of cancer. We have more information about
sun safety and cancer treatment
.
Skin cancer diagnosis
If you have symptoms, contact your GP. They will examine you and may take photos of the skin change. Sometimes, a specially trained GP may be able to remove the affected area.
If they think your symptoms could be a skin cancer, your GP can refer you to a specialist at a hospital. This is usually a doctor who specialises in treating skin diseases. They are called a dermatologist.
Your GP follows national guidelines to decide how quickly you need to see the specialist:
If they think you might have a melanoma or a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), they will make an urgent referral for a dermatologist appointment. This means your GP is asking for a dermatologist appointment for you within 2 weeks or as soon as the clinic can arrange it.
If your GP suspects that you have a basal cell carcinoma (BCC), they will make a routine referral. This means they are asking for a less urgent appointment for you, usually within 18 weeks. This is because nearly all BCCs grow slowly and are unlikely to change much during this time.
At the hospital
The dermatologist examines the affected area of skin. They also ask you questions about how long you have had symptoms, and any changes you may have noticed. They can learn a lot from a simple examination.
They may use an instrument called a dermatoscope to look more closely and examine the skin. It looks like a magnifying glass with a light.
It is not always possible to tell whether skin changes are cancer just by looking at the skin. Your doctor may talk to you about
having a biopsy
. This is when a sample of tissue is taken and then tested to find out more.
A biopsy can usually be done in an outpatient clinic. The doctor numbs the area with a local anaesthetic. Then they remove all or part of the affected skin. They send this to the laboratory for tests.
Different types of biopsies are used to diagnose skin cancer:
Incision biopsy
The doctor removes a small piece of the abnormal area, using a surgical knife. They then use stitches to close the small wound.
Excision biopsy
This is like an incision biopsy, but the whole abnormal area is removed. The doctor will also remove a small amount of healthy tissue around the abnormal area. This is called the margin. If you have an abnormal mole that may be melanoma, you may have the whole mole removed with an
excision biopsy
.
Punch biopsy
The doctor uses a small, round cutting instrument to remove a sample of skin. You might need stitches to close the area.
Shave biopsy
The doctor uses an instrument to shave off the top layer of the affected area of skin. The wound forms a scab and heals without the need for stitches.
Waiting for test results
can be a difficult time. We have more information that can help.
Further tests
If the biopsy shows you have a skin cancer, your doctor will usually check other areas of your skin. This is to determine whether there are other possible areas of skin cancer.
If you have a basal cell carcinoma (BCC), you probably will not need any further tests, as long as the cancer has been completely removed. This is because BCCs almost never spread.
If you have a melanoma, you may have tests to check the lymphoma nodes nearby. Find out more about
further tests for melanoma
.
If you have a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), your doctor may feel the lymph nodes close to the cancer to check whether any are enlarged. This is because SCCs can occasionally spread. Your doctor may recommend that you have an operation to take samples of the nearby lymph nodes. They will only do this if they think the cancer may have spread there, which is rare.
You may have some scans if your doctor thinks that the cancer has started to spread. These scans are not usually needed when you are first diagnosed. Your doctor will explain more about these tests to you.
Ultrasound scan
An
ultrasound scan
uses soundwaves to build up a picture of an area of the body. The person doing the scan uses some gel and a small device called an ultrasound probe on your skin.
CT scan
A
CT scan
uses x-rays to build up a detailed picture. A CT scanner looks like a large, thick ring. You lie still on a narrow bed that moves slowly backwards and forwards through the ring.
MRI scan
An
MRI scan
uses magnetism to build up a detailed picture. During the scan, you need to lie still on a bed inside a long cylinder (tube).
PET scan
A
PET scan
uses a low dose of radiation to check the activity of cells in different parts of the body. You have an injection about 1 hour before the scan. The scanner looks like a large, thick ring. You lie still on a narrow bed which moves slowly backwards and forwards through the ring.
Related pages
Cancer tests and waiting for results
Just been diagnosed?
Skin cancer treatment
A team of specialists will meet to discuss the best possible treatment for you. This is called a
multidisciplinary team (MDT)
.
The treatment you are offered depends on the type of skin cancer.
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) treatment
Surgery
is often used to treat BCC or SCC. It is usually the first and only treatment needed. Other
skin cancer treatments
are sometimes used instead of surgery.
Melanoma treatment
Surgery
is the main treatment for melanoma. Some people may need further surgery or other
melanoma treatments
depending on the stage of the melanoma.
You may have some treatments as part of a
clinical trial
.
Trusted information by email
We will send you regular emails to support you through diagnosis and beyond.
Sign up
Related pages
Cancer treatment options
Getting organised before cancer treatment
After skin cancer treatment
Follow-up after treatment for skin cancer
Many people who have surgery for basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) and early-stage squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) do not need long-term follow-up hospital appointments. But your doctor may want you to have regular check-ups for a time. This is to make sure that treatment has been successful and the cancer has not come back. You can also talk to your doctor or specialist nurse about any problems or worries you may have.
Follow-up after treatment for melanoma depends on the stage of the melanoma. You can find out more in our information about
melanoma
.
Once you have had a skin cancer, you have a higher risk of developing it again in the same area. This is called a recurrence. You are also more at risk of developing another one somewhere else on your skin.
Your specialist team may advise you to have regular skin checks with your GP. It is important to regularly check your skin for any new symptoms or changes that could be cancer. Using a mirror can help if there are areas you cannot see easily, such as your back. Or you can ask a family member or friend, if you feel comfortable doing so. If you have any problems, or notice any new symptoms in between check-ups, tell your doctor as soon as possible.
We have more information about
follow-up care after treatment
.
Preventing further skin cancers
After you have had treatment for skin cancer it is even more important to protect yourself from the sun. Find out how you can protect your skin in our information about
sun safety and cancer treatment
.
It is also important to:
Never use an indoor tanning device, such as a sunbed or sunlamp. If you want to look tanned, use fake tan.
Check your skin regularly for any changes.
If you are not often outdoors or in the sun, ask your specialist doctor or GP to check your vitamin D levels. Vitamin D is important for general health and can become low in people who avoid the sun or are indoors most of the time. You may need to take vitamin D supplements if your levels are low.
Body image after skin cancer treatment
Doctors will try to minimise the effects of skin cancer treatments on your appearance. Many people have only minor scarring after treatment. But for some, it may be more obvious.
If treatment has changed the way you look, you may feel differently about yourself and your body image.
Body image
is the picture in your mind of how your body looks and works. The effects will often improve with time, but you may feel more self-conscious about how you look.
Everyone’s reactions are different. You may feel more self-conscious about your body but find it manageable. Or you may find your concerns are on your mind a lot of the time, which may affect how you cope.
Talking with people you trust can help. This could be your family, friends, cancer doctor or nurse. Talking to another person who has been through something similar can also help.
There are practical things that can help you to:
feel better about your appearance
manage changes to your body
improve your confidence.
You may want to consider using camouflage make-up to cover a scar. Talk to your doctor or specialist nurse about camouflage make-up or about any concerns you have. Changing Faces has more information about
skin camouflage
.
We have more information about
body image and cancer treatment
.
Support after skin cancer
It is important to remember there is no right or wrong way to feel about a skin cancer diagnosis. Everyone’s reactions are different, and you might have a mixture of emotions.
Even if you were diagnosed with a skin cancer that is likely to be cured, you may feel anxious or upset for a while. Talking about your feelings can be helpful. You may find it helpful to talk with your family, friends, doctor or nurse. Sometimes it is easier to talk to someone who is not directly involved in your situation. If you are finding it difficult to cope, your cancer doctor, specialist nurse or GP may be able to refer you to a counsellor who can help.
Macmillan is here to support you. If you would like to talk, you can:
Call the Macmillan Support Line for free on
0808 808 0000
.
Chat to our specialists online
Visit our
Online Community skin cancer forum
to talk to people who have been affected by skin cancer, share your experience, and ask an expert your questions.
Other organisations who offer information and support
The following organisations also offer information and support:
Changing Faces
offers a range of advice and information services about visual differences to the face or body. Provides support and information by phone and online, through workshops and counselling services. Also offers a skin camouflage service in England and Scotland.
Know your skin
– developed by the British Skin Foundation to support people with skin conditions. Know your skin offers information about different skin conditions including skin cancer and Bowen’s disease.
Skcin
: the Karen Clifford skin cancer charity – Skcin offers information focusing on the prevention of skin cancer through education, promoting sun safety and early detection.
About our information
References
Below is a sample of the sources used in our skin cancer information. If you would like more information about the sources we use, please contact us at
informationproductionteam@macmillan.org.uk
Keohane SG, Botting J, Budny PG, et al. British Association of Dermatologists guidelines for the management of people with cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma 2020. The British Journal of Dermatology. 2021;184(3): 401–414. Available from
www.doi.org/10.1111/bjd.19621
[accessed May 2024].
Nasr I, McGrath EJ, Harwood CA, et al. British Association of Dermatologists guidelines for the management of adults with basal cell carcinoma 2021. The British Journal of Dermatology. 2021;185(5): 899–920. Available from
www.doi.org/10.1111/bjd.20524
[accessed May 2024].
Sharma A, Birnie AJ, Bordea C, et al. British Association of Dermatologists guidelines for the management of people with cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen disease) 2022. The British Journal of Dermatology. 2023;188(2): 186–194. Available from:
www.doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljac042
[accessed May 2024].
Reviewers
This information has been written, revised and edited by Macmillan Cancer Support’s Cancer Information Development team. It has been reviewed by expert medical and health professionals and people living with cancer. It has been approved by Senior Medical Editor, Professor Samra Turajlic, Consultant Medical Oncologist.
With thanks to: Dr Stephanie Arnold, Consultant; Kerry Jane Bate, Advanced Nurse Practitioner; Dr Philippa Closier, Clinical Oncologist; Sharon Cowell-Smith, Macmillan Advanced Nurse Practitioner Skin Cancers; and Dr Benjamin Shum, Medical Oncologist.
Thanks also to the other professionals and people affected by cancer who reviewed this edition, and to those who shared their stories.
Our cancer information has been awarded the
PIF TICK
. Created by the Patient Information Forum, this quality mark shows we meet PIF’s 10 criteria for trustworthy health information.
The language we use
We want everyone affected by cancer to feel our information is written for them.
We want our information to be as clear as possible. To do this, we try to:
use plain English
explain medical words
use short sentences
use illustrations to explain text
structure the information clearly
make sure important points are clear.
We use gender-inclusive language and talk to our readers as ‘you’ so that everyone feels included. Where clinically necessary we use the terms ‘men’ and ‘women’ or ‘male’ and ‘female’. For example, we do so when talking about parts of the body or mentioning statistics or research about who is affected.
You can read more about how we produce our information
here
.
Date reviewed
Reviewed:
01 September 2024
|
Next review:
01 September 2027
Our cancer information meets the
PIF TICK
quality mark.
This means it is easy to use, up-to-date and based on the latest evidence. Learn more about
how we produce our information.
Print page
How we can help
Macmillan Support Line
The Macmillan Support Line is a free and confidential phone service for people living and affected by cancer. If you need to talk, we'll listen.
Call us on 0808 808 00 00
8am to 8pm. It's free to call from landlines and mobiles within the UK
Email us
Get in touch via this form
Chat online
Every day 8am - 8pm
Online Community
An anonymous network of people affected by skin cancer which is free to join. Share experiences, ask questions and talk to people who understand.
Find local cancer support services
What's going on near you? Find out about support groups, where to get information and how to get involved with Macmillan where you live.
Get help