URL: https://www.curemelanoma.org/about-melanoma/melanoma-staging/stage-1

Donate
About Melanoma
>
Melanoma Staging
>
Stage 1
Stage 1 Melanoma
Stage I melanoma is no more than 1.0 millimeter thick (about the size of a sharpened pencil point), with or without an ulceration (broken skin). There is no evidence that Stage I melanoma has spread to the lymph tissues, lymph nodes, or body organs.
Stage I melanoma is considered local melanoma (this group also includes
Stage 0
and
Stage II
melanoma).
Stage I melanoma is divided into two subgroups:
Stage IA Melanoma
The melanoma tumor is less than 1.0 millimeter thick (less than the size of a sharpened pencil point) with or without ulceration (broken skin) when viewed under the microscope.
Stage IB Melanoma
The melanoma tumor is more than 1.0 millimeter and less than 2.0 millimeters thick without ulceration.
About Staging
Melanoma staging is based on the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system. The system assigns a stage based on tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) scores as well as additional prognostic factors. The goal is that melanomas of the same stage will have similar characteristics, treatment options, and outcomes. Learn more about
melanoma staging
.
Treatment for Stage 1 Melanoma
Stage I melanoma is treated by removing the tumor surgically. Wide local excision, a minor surgery, usually cures local melanoma. This may be accompanied by a sentinel lymph-node biopsy in some instances, but this is not recommended for all patients. Learn more about
melanoma treatments
.
Prognosis for Stage 1 Melanoma
With appropriate treatment, Stage I melanoma is highly curable. There is low risk for recurrence or metastasis. The 5-year survival rate as of 2018 for local melanoma, including Stage I, is 98.4%. Learn more about melanoma
survival rates
.
Follow-Up Care for Stage 1 Melanoma
After being treated for Stage I melanoma, you should conduct monthly self exams of your skin and lymph nodes and have an annual, full-body skin exam performed by a trained dermatologist for the rest of your life. You should also undergo a physical exam by your doctor every 6 to 12 months for the first 5 years, and then annually as needed. Imaging tests may be ordered as needed to monitor for recurrence.

Back to Melanoma Staging
Related Content
About Melanoma
Melanoma Survival Rates
Stage 2
Understanding Melanoma Staging
MRA’s newsletter
Share on social
Just Diagnosed?
If you've been recently diagnosed with melanoma, you are not alone. The Melanoma > Exchange is a free online melanoma treatment and research-focused discussion group and support community.
Join the Community
More MRA Resources